is obtained by adding the current local clock and a clock boost,
and making the sum larger than the last adjusted clock. A new
64-bit timestamp is generated by taking the low-order 56 bits of the
adjusted clock and appending the 8-bit thread ID.
Each thread remembers two timestamps. (thread.wts) stores
the timestamp generated by the above procedure. (thread.rts)
stores min_wts minus 1, where min_wts is the minimum of
(thread.wts) for all threads, updated by a leader thread periodically (§3.8). min_rts is also calculated similarly to (thread.rts),
and is used for safe garbage collection. A read-write transaction
uses (thread.wts) as its timestamp. A read-only transaction uses
(thread.rts) instead, and does not track or validate the read set; it
always sees consistent data because concurrent or future read-write
transactions’ timestamp is no earlier than min_wts and thus is later
than (thread.rts).
Cicada tolerates loose synchronization of clocks. Its protocol
(§3.4) does not assume that ordered timestamps are also ordered in
physical time; it only requires that timestamps are unique and each
3.3

Best-Effort Inlining

Cicada uses best-effort inlining to reduce the indirection cost
of multi-version execution while avoiding creating overhead and
contention.
A transaction attempts to use the preallocated space for the inlined version in the head. It decides whether to use inlining when
a write access to a record is requested; if the inlined version is
UNUSED, it attempts to take ownership of the inlined version using an atomic compare-and-swap (CAS) operation on the status
field to change it to PENDING. If the CAS succeeds, it uses the inlined version to store new record data; otherwise, it falls back to
dynamic allocation of a non-inlined version. Inlining is applied
only to small records (up to 216 bytes of record data inlined in our
implementation—4 cachelines per head node including overhead)
because inlining large records has diminishing returns, and large
head nodes complicate memory management of the head node array.
Figure 2 illustrates inlining. Record 0 is not using inlining; the
pointer of the head points to a non-inlined version. Record 1 uses
inlining for the latest version, which can save a cache miss for
transactions accessing the record. Record 2 shows that the inlined
version does not have to be the latest version; the inlined version
behaves the same as if it were non-inlined, except that it is simply
marked as UNUSED when deallocated.
Cicada may promote a non-inlined version to make it inlined.
The conditions are (1) a transaction reads a non-inlined version
v as the visible version; (2) the version is early enough: (v.wts)
< min_rts; and (3) the inlined version is currently UNUSED. If so,
Cicada automatically upgrades the read access to an RMW access,
which attempts to write an inlined version with the same record data.
The promotion may fail if there is a concurrent write to the record,
but condition (2) makes this case rare. As a result, even if the latest
version of a record is non-inlined, it eventually becomes inlined.
To avoid creating a contention point at the inlined version, promotion only optimizes infrequently- or never-changing read-intensive
records. If a record is frequently written, promoting a version of
such a record will incur unnecessary write overhead. If the record is
never read, promotion does not provide a performance benefit; Cicada still can perform promotion for never-used records by scanning
tables occasionally, simply to save space.

3.4

Serializable Multi-Version Validation

Cicada’s validation protocol ensures that the execution of a committed transaction appears to occur atomically at the transaction’s
timestamp (tx.ts). As a result, any schedule for committed transactions in Cicada is equivalent to the serial schedule that executes

the committed transactions in their timestamp order; Appendix A
provides the formal proof. This multi-version protocol permits a
transaction to freely read and write non-latest versions of records
